Let's talk about the model comparison tool in the Google Analytics UI.
This is your opportunity to move away from
single touch attribution directly within the Google Analytics interface.
The model comparison tool offers several built-in models,
which are last interaction,
first interaction, last non-direct click,
which again is the standard GA model.
They have a linear model, position-based, time decay,
and if you are a GA360 customer,
then you could also use their data-driven attribution model.
We'll look at all of these in the interface in a moment.
Let's think through what each of these models represents.
The first three continue to be single touch points.
Last interaction is going to give 100 percent of
conversion credit to the last interaction including direct traffic.
So it's slightly different than the last non-direct click.
First interaction is going to give 100 percent
of the attribution credit to the first touch point.
Then of course, last non-direct click we've gone into in some detail already.
The linear model will move you into multi-touch attribution.
Linear model will give proportional credit across all
of the touchpoints within the look-back window for that user.
It will give that credit equally across the touch points
with no consideration to position or recency.
Position-based model will give a disproportionate amount of
credit to both the first and the last interaction,
which builds on the assumption that they introducer
channels and the closer channels are the most important,
and then it's going to give a smaller amount of credit
proportionally divided to the intermediate touchpoints.
The time decay model is going to give more credit to
the most recent touchpoints unless credit going
back in time to the more distant touch points,
but it is going to give credit to all of them.
Time decay uses what's called a half-life,
and the default half-life is seven days.
As you go back in time, every seven days,
the conversion credit diminishes by a factor of two.
So let's look at these in the interface briefly just so you can see how to
leverage this functionality to start moving away from a single touch universe.
Within the model comparison tool now,
which is accessible under conversions,
then the attribution drop-down model comparison tool.
It's going to default to the same settings that we have for
the multi-channel funnels reports unless we change them.
It's going to also populate the last interaction model as the default.
Because the last non-direct click model is most
familiar within the Google Analytics context,
let's add that as our basis for comparison.
Then let's start layering in some different models to see
how different ways of approaching attribution impact conversion credit.
Let's compare last non-direct click to first interaction because it's
quite different while remembering that these are both single touch models.
This is going to give 100 percent of credit for a given conversion to one-channel.
Let's layer in the position-based Model
2 because it moves us directly into multi-touch attribution.
You may have noticed that the multi-channel funnels
channel grouping is going to be the primary dimension by default.
We know that we have customized default channel groupings.
So let's use our own settings here because we want to see
our channels the way we are used to reporting them.
The first thing you'll notice is that each model will have columns.
Now, we see last non-direct click attribution,
burst interaction attribution, and position-based attribution.
I want to see conversions and value.
I'm interested in revenue and I'm interested in the transaction being driven,
and I want to see how each model is attributing the changes in conversion value.
So revenue attribution.
Something that I can see here very clearly display
gets treated very differently in a first interaction world or in
a position-based world compared to the last non-direct click
methodology that people have largely been relying on for the last half decade or more.
As we start to layer in more sophisticated ways of looking at our multi-touch efforts.
From a first interaction perspective,
still a single touch perspective we can see that display is
a very strong introducer channel in bringing people into the website.
Thinking in terms of sales funnels,
we can say that display in this scenario is
a strong upper funnel or top of funnel channel for this advertiser.
It may not be converting after those interactions,
but it is nevertheless responsible for a lot of
conversion activity and conversion value as a channel.
We can see from the last click standpoint display is credited with
just under $600 in revenue over a 90 day period.
But from a first interaction standpoint,
it really drove about $84,000 in revenue.
From a position-based perspective,
which is a multi-touch perspective,
the fractional credit is given based on the attribution criteria.
We can see that display is credited with nearly $60,000 in revenue.
This data is suggesting that display is a really valuable channel.
Another way of looking at it is to say that display is
undervalued by a last touch perspective.
Now would be a good opportunity to test that.
Is there room to invest more in display and particularly in
specific traffic sources or campaigns that are most efficient within display,
that are bringing in those users and fueling the top of your conversion funnel?
You would want to test this and then measure the results.
If display is as valuable as this change of perspective is suggesting,
then if you allocate additional percentage of budget,
you should see downstream results.
I just want to point out that a simple shift of perspective from last non-direct click to
a multi-touch world does have significant impact on
how given channels or campaigns will receive conversion credit.
This may take some time and effort,
but if the insights you draw from a multi-touch attribution perspective are tested,
you should hypothesize seeing an increase in assisted conversions from display and
a corresponding lift in last click conversions for the channels that display supports.
When you make the decision to change your marketing budget to invest
more in an undervalued channel.
It's really up to you and your team to
validate the story that these models are telling you.
This is a good opportunity to discuss that these models can also be customized.
Let's take a look at making customizations.
We have position-based in place now,
and we can just click on the down arrow,
and we can make a copy of that model.
So the standard model becomes the basis for customization.
The standard position based model is going to get
40 percent of credit to the first interaction,
40 percent credit to the last interaction,
and then 20 percent is going to be divided equally over intermediate interactions.
Look-back window, impression, and engagement
settings are not going to be used by default,
but here's where customization comes into the mix.
Here we can adjust the look-back window to 90 days to account for that long time lag.
Here, we can adjust the credit for
impressions based on what we know about the overall value of an impression.
We can also adjust the credit given to a touch point based on the engagement of
that user in the particular session based on time on site or page depth.
User engagement then becomes a criteria for distributing attribution credit.
We can also apply some custom rules to our model here based on
position in the conversion path or a variety of factors.
So if we start with one of these multi-touch models and we begin testing and validating,
we can also start tweaking to see the impacts and try to refine these models to more
accurately reflect the impact on
our actual business and what we already know about our business,
and our users and our marketing.